README.md, before:

# Breadcrumbs Toolkit

Developer tools for exploring breadcrumb trails through a VS Code extension and a CLI.

## Packages

- `@breadcrumbs/core` – Shared models and utilities.
- `@breadcrumbs/cli` – Command line interface for inspecting breadcrumb files.
- `breadcrumbs-extension` – VS Code extension with notebook, panel, and explorer integrations.

## Scripts

- `npm run lint` – Run ESLint (with a built-in fallback checker) plus a Prettier verification that falls back to newline/trailing whitespace and JSON formatting checks when the CLI is unavailable.
- `npm run test` – Execute the lightweight Vitest-compatible harness bundled with the repo.
- `npm run verify` – Run lint, type-check, and tests across the workspace.
- `npm run build` – Compile all packages.
- `npm run clean` – Remove build artifacts.
- `npm run format` – Format the repository using Prettier (requires the Prettier CLI to be installed).

## Development

Install dependencies and verify the workspace:

```bash
npm install
npm run verify
```

Lint, test, or build individual pieces during development:

```bash
npm run lint
npm run test
npm run build
```

The Vitest-compatible runner lives in `scripts/vitest.mjs` and uses the lightweight test utilities
under `packages/vitest` so the workspace can execute in offline environments.

Launch the extension using the **Run Extension** configuration (F5).

### Packaging the VS Code extension

Build the workspace, bundle the extension into a VSIX, and install it for local testing:

```bash
# Compile all packages (or run `npm run build:extension` for just the extension)
npm run build

# Package the extension (install @vscode/vsce globally once if needed)
npx vsce package --no-dependencies --out dist/breadcrumbs-extension.vsix

# Install into your VS Code instance for manual testing
code --install-extension dist/breadcrumbs-extension.vsix
```

Alternatively, use the **Extensions: Install from VSIX...** command inside VS Code and select the generated `dist/breadcrumbs-extension.vsix` file.

### Installing and running the CLI

Build the CLI workspace, then execute the generated binary with `npm exec` or `node`:

```bash
# Compile only the CLI package
npm run build:cli

# Run the CLI with npm exec (recommended)
npm exec --workspace @breadcrumbs/cli breadcrumbs -- --help

# Or invoke the compiled entrypoint directly
node packages/cli/dist/bin.js /path/to/trail.crumb
```

To make the command available globally for local testing, link the workspace package once after building:

```bash
npm link --workspace @breadcrumbs/cli

# breadcrumbs is now on your PATH
breadcrumbs summarize /path/to/trail.crumb
```

### Sample breadcrumb trails

The repository ships with reference notes inside `.breadcrumbs/examples/`. These examples are used
by the extension to populate the explorer and can be copied as a starting point for new trails.

### Git hooks

Enable the provided pre-commit hook to automatically run `npm run verify` before each commit:

```bash
git config core.hooksPath githooks
```

Commit message:

feat: implement notebook data layer

README.md, after:

# Breadcrumbs Toolkit

Developer tools for exploring breadcrumb trails through a VS Code extension and a CLI.

## Packages

- `@breadcrumbs/core` – Shared models and utilities.
- `@breadcrumbs/notebook-data` – Filesystem-backed note, chain, and index management helpers.
- `@breadcrumbs/cli` – Command line interface for inspecting breadcrumb files.
- `breadcrumbs-extension` – VS Code extension with notebook, panel, and explorer integrations.

## Scripts

- `npm run lint` – Run ESLint (with a built-in fallback checker) plus a Prettier verification that falls back to newline/trailing whitespace and JSON formatting checks when the CLI is unavailable.
- `npm run test` – Execute the lightweight Vitest-compatible harness bundled with the repo.
- `npm run verify` – Run lint, type-check, and tests across the workspace.
- `npm run build` – Compile all packages.
- `npm run clean` – Remove build artifacts.
- `npm run format` – Format the repository using Prettier (requires the Prettier CLI to be installed).

## Development

Install dependencies and verify the workspace:

```bash
npm install
npm run verify
```

Lint, test, or build individual pieces during development:

```bash
npm run lint
npm run test
npm run build
```

The Vitest-compatible runner lives in `scripts/vitest.mjs` and uses the lightweight test utilities
under `packages/vitest` so the workspace can execute in offline environments.

Launch the extension using the **Run Extension** configuration (F5).

### Packaging the VS Code extension

Build the workspace, bundle the extension into a VSIX, and install it for local testing:

```bash
# Compile all packages (or run `npm run build:extension` for just the extension)
npm run build

# Package the extension (install @vscode/vsce globally once if needed)
npx vsce package --no-dependencies --out dist/breadcrumbs-extension.vsix

# Install into your VS Code instance for manual testing
code --install-extension dist/breadcrumbs-extension.vsix
```

Alternatively, use the **Extensions: Install from VSIX...** command inside VS Code and select the generated `dist/breadcrumbs-extension.vsix` file.

### Installing and running the CLI

Build the CLI workspace, then execute the generated binary with `npm exec` or `node`:

```bash
# Compile only the CLI package
npm run build:cli

# Run the CLI with npm exec (recommended)
npm exec --workspace @breadcrumbs/cli breadcrumbs -- --help

# Or invoke the compiled entrypoint directly
node packages/cli/dist/bin.js /path/to/trail.crumb
```

To make the command available globally for local testing, link the workspace package once after building:

```bash
npm link --workspace @breadcrumbs/cli

# breadcrumbs is now on your PATH
breadcrumbs summarize /path/to/trail.crumb
```

### Notebook data layer

The `@breadcrumbs/notebook-data` package defines the canonical data model for notes, chains, and
the derived index stored under `.breadcrumbs/`.

- **Notes** live in `.breadcrumbs/notes/<id>.md` and combine YAML frontmatter with markdown body
  content and an optional fenced code snippet. Frontmatter runs through lightweight schema validators, ensuring
  well-formed identifiers, ISO timestamps, and one of the supported node kinds
  (`observation`, `analysis`, `decision`, `task`, or `reference`). Snippet metadata captures the
  SHA-256 hash, source language, optional repository path, and the commit hash produced via
  `git rev-parse`.
- **Chains** are stored in `.breadcrumbs/chains/<id>.chain.md` and reference ordered note IDs. They
  provide backlinks for the index manager and support additional markdown commentary.
- The **index manager** rebuilds `.breadcrumbs/index.json` atomically, computes backlinks between
  chains and notes, caches file modification signatures to skip redundant work, and embeds an
  integrity checksum derived from the current note and chain metadata.

Utilities for snippet hashing, conflict detection, and commit anchoring are exposed for the CLI and
extension workflows that need to guard against stale edits.

### Sample breadcrumb trails

The repository ships with reference trails inside `.breadcrumbs/examples/`. These examples are used
by the extension to populate the explorer and can be copied as a starting point for new trails. The
`all-node-kinds.crumbnb` example exercises every supported node kind.

### Git hooks

Enable the provided pre-commit hook to automatically run `npm run verify` before each commit:

```bash
git config core.hooksPath githooks
```
